DOCS-22515 - Make observability tutorial into single page (#1195)
confluentinc/examples: ccloud-observability/docs/index.rst

.. _ccloud-observability-index:

Observability Overview and Setup
--------------------------------

> Using |ccloud| has the advantage of circumventing the trials and tribulations one would face when monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using |ccloud| has the advantage of circumventing the challenges you might face when monitoring
```

applications gives you insights on how to fine tune your producers and consumers, when to scale
your |ccloud| cluster, what might be going wrong, and how to resolve the problem.

This module covers how to set up a time-series database populated with data from the
|ccloud| Metrics API and client metrics from a locally running Java consumer and producer,
along with how to set up a data visualization tool. After the initial setup, you will
follow a series of scenarios to create failure scenarios and to be alerted when the errors occur.

.. note::

   This example uses Prometheus as the time-series database and Grafana for visualization, but the same principles can be applied to any other technologies.

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Access to `Confluent Cloud <https://confluent.cloud/login>`__.

-  Local `install of Confluent Cloud CLI
   <https://docs.confluent.io/ccloud-cli/current/install.html>`__ (v3.0.0 or later)

-  `jq <https://github.com/stedolan/jq/wiki/Installation>`__ installed on your host

-  `Docker <https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/>`__ installed on your host

> Cost to Run Tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Evaluate the Costs to Run the Tutorial
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> Caution

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

I don't think this is needed

^^^^^^^

.. include:: ../../ccloud/docs/includes/ccloud-examples-caution.rst

> |ccloud| Promo Code

Reviewer: This section is blank in the built doc

.. _ccloud-observability-producer-confluent-cloud-unreachable:

|ccloud| Unreachable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the ``producer`` container, add a rule blocking network traffic that has a destination TCP port ``9092``. This will prevent the producer from reaching the |ak| cluster in |ccloud|.

This scenario will look at |ccloud| metrics from the Metrics API and client metrics from the client application's MBean object ``kafka.producer:type=producer-metrics,client-id=producer-1``.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Introduce failure scenario
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Add a rule blocking traffic in the ``producer`` container on port ``9092`` which is used to talk to the broker:

   .. code-block:: bash

      docker compose exec producer iptables -A OUTPUT -p tcp --dport 9092 -j DROP

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Diagnose the problem
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. From your web browser, navigate to the Grafana dashboard at http://localhost:3000 and login with the username ``admin`` and password ``password``.

#. Navigate to the ``Producer Client Metrics`` dashboard.  Wait 2 minutes and then observe:

   -  A downward trend in outgoing bytes which can be found by the expanding the ``Throughput`` tab.

>    -  The top level panels like ``Record error rate`` (derived from |ak| MBean attribute ``record-error-rate``) should turn red, a major indication something is wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   -  The top-level panels like ``Record error rate`` (derived from |ak| MBean attribute ``record-error-rate``) should turn red, a major indication something is wrong.
```

   -  The spark line in the ``Free buffer space`` (derived from |ak| MBean attribute ``buffer-available-bytes``) panel go down and a bump in ``Retry rate`` (derived from |ak| MBean attribute ``record-retry-rate``)

   This means the producer is not producing data, which could happen for a few reasons.

   |Producer Connectivity Loss|

> #. In order to isolate this problem to the producer, check the status of the |ccloud| cluster, specifically that it is accepting requests. Navigate to the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Check the status of the |ccloud| cluster, specifically that it is accepting requests to isolate this problem to the producer. To do this, navigate to the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard.
```

> #. Look at the top panels, they should all be green which means the cluster is operating safely within its resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Look at the top panels. They should all be green which means the cluster is operating safely within its resources.
```

   |Confluent Cloud Panel|

   For a connectivity problem in a client, look specifically at the ``Requests (rate)``. If this value

>    were yellow or red, the client connectivity problem could be due to hitting the |ccloud|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   is yellow or red, the client connectivity problem could be due to hitting the |ccloud|
```

      producer           | [2021-02-11 18:16:12,232] WARN [Producer clientId=producer-1] Received invalid metadata error in produce request on partition demo-topic-1-3 due to org.apache.kafka.common.errors.NetworkException: The server disconnected before a response was received.. Going to request metadata update now (org.apache.kafka.clients.producer.internals.Sender)

   Note that the logs provide a clear picture of what is going on--``Error: NETWORK_EXCEPTION`` and ``server disconnected``. This was expected because the failure scenario we introduced blocked outgoing traffic to the broker's port. Looking at metrics alone won't always lead you directly to an answer but they are a quick way to see if things are working as expected.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Resolve failure scenario
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Remove the rule we created earlier that blocked traffic with the following command:

   .. code-block:: bash

      docker compose exec producer iptables -D OUTPUT -p tcp --dport 9092 -j DROP

> #. It may take a few minutes for the producer to start sending requests again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   It may take a few minutes for the producer to start sending requests again.
```

Doesn't seem like this needs to be a step

   .. code-block:: bash

      confluent kafka acl create --service-account sa-123456 --operation write  --topic '*' --deny

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Diagnose the problem
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. From your web browser, navigate to the Grafana dashboard at http://localhost:3000 and login with the username ``admin`` and password ``password``.

#. Navigate to the ``Producer Client Metrics`` dashboard.  Wait 2 minutes and then observe:

   -  The top level panel with ``Record error rate`` (``record-error-rate``) should turn red, a major indication something is wrong.

   -  Throughput, e.g. ``Outgoing byte rate`` (``outgoing-byte-rate``), shows the producer is successfully sending messages to the broker.  This is technically correct: the producer _is_ sending the batch of records to the cluster but they are not being written to the broker's log because of lack of authorization.

   |Producer Authorization Problem|

#. Check the status of the |ccloud| cluster, specifically that it is accepting requests. Navigate to the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard.

> #. In the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard, look at the top panels, they should all be green which means the cluster is operating safely within its resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. In the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard, look at the top panels, they should all be green, which means the cluster is operating safely within its resources.
```

              if (e != null) {
                e.printStackTrace();
              } else {
                System.out.printf("Produced record to topic %s%n", topic);
              }
            }
        });

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Resolve failure scenario
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Delete the ACL created above that denied the service account permission to write to any topic.  Insert your service account ID instead of ``sa-123456``:

   .. code-block:: bash

      confluent kafka acl delete --service-account sa-123456 --operation write  --topic '*' --deny

#. Verify that the ``org.apache.kafka.common.errors.TopicAuthorizationException`` log messages stopped in the ``producer`` container.

   .. code-block:: bash

      docker compose logs producer

.. _ccloud-observability-consumer-overview:

Consumer Client Scenarios
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The dashboard and scenarios in this section use client metrics from a Java consumer. The same principles can be applied to any
other non-java clients--they generally offer similar metrics.

The source code for the client can found in the
:devx-examples:`ccloud-observability/src|ccloud-observability/src` directory. The client

> uses default configurations, this is not recommended for production use cases. This Java consumer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uses default configurations, which is not recommended for production use cases. This Java consumer
```

will continue to consumer the same message until the process is interrupted. The content of the

> message is not important here, in these scenarios the focus is on the change in client metric values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
message is not important here. In these scenarios the focus is on the change in client metric values.
```

|Consumer Dashboard|

.. _ccloud-observability-consumer-increasing-consumer-lag:

Increasing Consumer Lag
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Consumer lag is a tremendous performance indicator. It tells you the offset difference between the
producer's last produced message and the consumer group's last commit. If you are unfamiliar with
consumer groups or concepts like committing offsets, please refer to this
`Kafka Consumer documentation <https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/clients/consumer.html>`__.

A large consumer lag, or a quickly growing lag, indicates that the consumer is not able to keep up with
the volume of messages on a topic.

This scenario will look at metrics from various sources. Consumer lag metrics are pulled from the

> `kafka-lag-exporter <https://github.com/lightbend/kafka-lag-exporter>`__ container, a scala open source project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`kafka-lag-exporter <https://github.com/lightbend/kafka-lag-exporter>`__ container, a Scala open-source project
```

that collects data about consumer groups and presents them in a Prometheus scrapable format. Metrics
about |ccloud| cluster resource usage are pulled from the Metrics API endpoints. Consumer client metrics
are pulled from the client application’s MBean object ``kafka.consumer:type=consumer-fetch-manager-metrics,client-id=<client_id>``.

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Introduce failure scenario

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Introduce failure a scenario
```

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> #. By default 1 consumer and 1 producer are running. Adjust that to 1 consumer and 5 producers in order to force the condition where the consumer cannot keep up with the rate of messages being produced, which will cause an increase in consumer lag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. By default 1 consumer and 1 producer are running. Change this to 1 consumer and 5 producers to force the condition where the consumer cannot keep up with the rate of messages being produced, which will cause an increase in consumer lag.
```

   The container scaling can be done with the command below:

   .. code-block:: bash

      docker compose up -d --scale producer=5

>    Which will produce the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This produces the following output:
```

      Creating ccloud-observability_producer_5              ... done
      Starting ccloud-observability_consumer_1              ... done

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Diagnose the problem
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Open `Grafana <http://localhost:3000>`__ and login with the username ``admin`` and password ``password``.

#. Navigate to the ``Consumer Client Metrics`` dashboard. Wait 2 minutes and then observe:

   - An upward trend in ``Consumer group lag in records``.  ``Consumer group lag in seconds`` will have a less dramatic increase.
     Both indicate that the producer is creating more messages than the consumer can fetch in a timely manner.
     These metrics are derived from the ``kafka-lag-exporter`` container.

   |Consumer Lag|

   - An increase in ``Fetch request rate`` (``fetch-total``) and ``Fetch size avg`` (``fetch-size-avg``) in the ``Consumer Fetch Metrics`` tab, indicating the consumer is fetching more often and larger batches.

   |Consumer Fetch Increase|

   - All of the graphs in the ``Throughput`` are indicating the consumer is processing more bytes/records.

   |Consumer Throughput Increase|

   .. note::

>       If a client is `properly tuned <https://docs.confluent.io/cloud/current/client-apps/optimizing/index.html>`__ and has adequate resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      If a client is `properly tuned <https://docs.confluent.io/cloud/current/client-apps/optimizing/index.html>`__ and has adequate resources,
```

      an increase in throughput metrics or fetch metrics won't necessarily mean the consumer lag will increase.

> #. Another view of consumer lag can be found in |ccloud|. Open the UI, navigate to the "Consumers" section and click on the ``demo-cloud-observability-1`` consumer group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Another view of consumer lag can be found in |ccloud|. Open the console, navigate to the "Consumers" section and click on the ``demo-cloud-observability-1`` consumer group.
```

   This page will update periodically, within two minutes you should see a steady increase is the offset lag.

   |Confluent Cloud Consumer Lag|

   This provides a snapshot in time, but it lacks the historical view that the ``Consumer Client Metrics`` dashboard provides.

#. The current consumer lag can also be observed via the CLI if you have Confluent Platform installed.

   .. code-block:: bash

      kafka-consumer-groups --bootstrap-server $BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS --command-config $CONFIG_FILE --describe --group demo-cloud-observability-1

>    Which will produce something similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This produces something similar to the following:
```

      demo-cloud-observability-1 demo-topic-1    2          48310           48370           60              consumer-demo-cloud-observability-1-1-b0bec0b5-ec84-4233-9d3e-09d132b9a3c7 /10.2.10.251    consumer-demo-cloud-observability-1-1

   Again the downside of this view is the lack of historical context that the ``Consumer Client Metrics`` dashboard provides.

#. A top level view of the |ccloud| cluster that reflects an increase in bytes produced and bytes consumed can be viewed in the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard in the panels highlighted below.

   |Confluent Cloud Request Increase|

#. The consumer logs won't show that the consumer is falling behind which is why it is important to have a robust monitoring solution that covers consumer lag.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Resolve failure scenario
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Start ``consumer-1`` container, thus adding a consumer back to the consumer group, and stop the extra producers:

   .. code-block:: bash

      docker compose up -d --scale producer=1

>    Which will produce the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This produces the following output:
```

|Confluent Cloud Dashboard|

.. _ccloud-observability-general-fail-to-create-partition:

Failing to create a new partition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It's possible you won't be able to create a partition because you have reached a one of |ccloud|'s partition limits.
Follow the instructions below to check if your cluster is getting close to its partition limits.

#. Open `Grafana <http://localhost:3000>`__ and use the username ``admin`` and password ``password`` to login.

#. Navigate to the ``Confluent Cloud`` dashboard.

#. Check the ``Partition Count`` panel. If this panel is yellow, you have used 80% of your allowed partitions; if it's red, you have used 90%.

   |Confluent Cloud Panel|

   A maximum number of partitions can exist on the cluster at one time, before replication.
   All topics that are created by you as well as internal topics that are automatically created by
   Confluent Platform components–such as ksqlDB, Kafka Streams, Connect, and Control Center–count towards the cluster partition limit.

#. Check the ``Partition count change (delta)`` panel. |ccloud| clusters have a limit on the

>    number of partitions that can be created and deleted in a 5 minute period. This single stat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   number of partitions that can be created and deleted in a 5 minute period. This statistic
```

   provides the absolute difference between the number of partitions at the beginning and end of

>    the 5 minute period. This over simplifies the problem. An example being, at the start of a 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the 5 minute period. This over simplifies the problem. For example, at the start of a 5
```
